SP-3226: Updates for DP2 release, PPDB and image services (#67)
lsst/rtn-011: datapreview.tex

The Deep Drilling Fields achieve substantially greater depth; ELAISS1 and COSMOS are the most extensively observed, with coverage in all six bands.
Visits are included in the deep coadds if the visit-level median PSF FWHM is better than 1.7~arcseconds, each detector has a PSF FWHM better than 1.8~arcseconds, and the atmospheric transparency is at least 0.75.
An additional $\sim~15\%$ of otherwise qualifying inputs were excluded on the basis of PSF ellipticity $e$ > 0.2.

Figure~\ref{fig:dp2_psf_maglim} shows the $5\sigma$ PSF magnitude limit across the DP2 coadded footprint for each of the six LSST bands.
\input{figures/dp2_psf_maglim}
(LSST = the LSST footprint; 3k = the original SV footprint; 750 is the consolidated/revised SV footprint; 300 is the top 300 degrees. Table gives the median values.)

An initial tutorial notebook for exploring and visualizing the DP2 visit and tract metadata (e.g., coordinates, filters, dates) is available in the Rubin Science Platform under the ``Tutorials -- DP2'' drop-down menu, and can be used to interactively generate and explore figures such as Figure~\ref{fig:dp2_visits_tracts}.

\subsubsection{DP2 Fields}

> %Table \ref{} lists the

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Visit-level images, which must be streamed from USDF, will follow once sufficient bandwidth is confirmed.

\subsubsection{Dataset Definition}
\label{sssec:dp2-sky}

The DP2 dataset comprises science visits acquired between \startsciencelsstcam\ and \dptwocutoffdate.
Coadds are restricted to regions within the survey footprint established during the LSSTCam on-sky commissioning campaign (through \finonskylsstcam); observations falling outside this footprint, taken during the subsequent early operations period, have insufficient visit counts for coadd inclusion and are provided instead as single-epoch images.
Visit-level exclusions include engineering frames, out-of-focus sequences acquired for Active Optics System (AOS) commissioning, stray-light scans, and visits flagged in the \texttt{excluded\_visits} list, which typically comprise images affected by focus errors or anomalous mount or hexapod motion.
See tables 1 and 4 in \citeds{RTN-111} for a summary of the visit-level exclusions applied during the processing.

> DP2 contains approximately 30,000 visits, of which $\sim~16{,}900$ meet the quality thresholds for inclusion in the deep coadds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DP2 contains approximately 30,000 visits, of which $\sim$16,900 meet the quality thresholds for inclusion in the deep coadds.
```

The use of two different number fonts in the same sentence looks poor, and the spacing between the tilde and the number is also unnatural.  Let's see if this looks better.

Author: yeah - I changed a few times and missed this one clearly

\subsubsection{Sky Coverage and depth}

Figure~\ref{fig:dp2_visits_tracts} shows the distribution of DP2 visits on the sky across all filters
\begin{figure}[htb]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.98\linewidth]{dp2_visits_tracts_nvisits}
\caption{A 2D histogram illustrating the distribution of DP2 visits on the sky for all filters combined.}
\label{fig:dp2_visits_tracts}
\vspace{0.1cm}
\end{figure}

> The DP2 coadded footprint covers $\sim~3{,}000~deg^{2}$ in all six filters, defined to encompass the Wide-Fast-Deep, Small Field Survey, and Deep Drilling Field regions; visits within these areas are included in the coadds if they meet image quality requirements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The DP2 coadded footprint covers $\sim$3,000 $\mathrm{deg}^{2}$ in all six filters, defined to encompass the Wide-Fast-Deep, Small Field Survey, and Deep Drilling Field regions; visits within these areas are included in the coadds if they meet image quality requirements.
```

> The total sky area with coverage in at least one filter is $\sim~15{,}000~deg^{2}$, with visits outside the coadded footprint available as single-epoch images only.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The total sky area with coverage in at least one filter is $\sim$15,000 $\mathrm{deg}^{2}$, with visits outside the coadded footprint available as single-epoch images only.
```

Wide-area survey regions reach median coadded depths broadly comparable to those reported for the Science Validation surveys (\S\,\ref{ssec:commissioning-lsstcam}).
The Deep Drilling Fields achieve substantially greater depth; ELAISS1 and COSMOS are the most extensively observed, with coverage in all six bands.
Visits are included in the deep coadds if the visit-level median PSF FWHM is better than 1.7~arcseconds, each detector has a PSF FWHM better than 1.8~arcseconds, and the atmospheric transparency is at least 0.75.
An additional $\sim~15\%$ of otherwise qualifying inputs were excluded on the basis of PSF ellipticity $e$ > 0.2.

Figure~\ref{fig:dp2_psf_maglim} shows the $5\sigma$ PSF magnitude limit across the DP2 coadded footprint for each of the six LSST bands.
\input{figures/dp2_psf_maglim}

> (LSST = the LSST footprint; 3k = the original SV footprint; 750 is the consolidated/revised SV footprint; 300 is the top 300 degrees. Table gives the median values.)

Reviewer 2: This parenthetical seems to have become disconnected from some diagram or table in which these abbreviations were used.  Suggest removing it unless the missing table(?) is to be restored.

Author: ahh -  they were my development notes

Author: I have to expand that out

Author: done

\subsubsection{DP2 Fields}

The DP2 dataset encompasses the Science Validation wide-area survey,  Deep Drilling Fields (ECDFS, EDFS\_a, EDFS\_b, and ELAISS1, COSMOS), and a number of targeted small-field regions including the Trifid--Lagoon, Prawn, M49, and New Horizons fields that were part of the Rubin First Light campaign.

Table \ref{tab:dp1_fields_in_dp2} details the number of visits in DP2 that overlap the DP1 fields with a breakdown by band.
\input{tables/dp1_fields_in_dp2}

\subsubsection{Early DP2 Data Products}
\label{sssec:edp2}

Early DP2  will include \textbf{all} catalog data products derived from the DRP reprocessing of the DP2 dataset, but only the deep coadd images; visit-level images will not be available until the full DP2 release \S~\ref{sssec:dp2-full}.

Deep coadd images are hosted directly in Google Cloud and can be served without reliance on hybrid cloud bandwidth between the USDF and Google Cloud.

> They will be distributed in a new \texttt{LSST images} format, which enables efficient bulk data access and embeds WCS, PSF models, and photometric calibration metadata in a manner that is independent of the LSST science pipelines, supporting long-term archival use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They will be distributed in a new \texttt{LSST images} FITS-based format, which enables more efficient bulk data access and embeds WCS, PSF models, and photometric calibration metadata in a manner that is independent of details of the LSST science pipelines, supporting long-term archival use.
Documentation on this format will be provided along with Early DP2.
```

This commissioning and early operations dataset was reprocessed during late 2025 and early 2026 to produce the DP2 data products.
Data processing completed in April 2026 and the products are currently undergoing detailed validation and preparation for release via the RSP (\S\,\ref{ssec:rsp}).
The full definition and production plan for DP2 is described in \citeds{RTN-111}.

DP2 will be delivered in two phases over the \dptwofulldaterange window.
The first phase, \textbf{Early DP2 (EDP2)}, comprises the deep coadd images and all catalogs, with a target release date of \edptwodate.
The second phase, \textbf{DP2}, adds the visit-level data products, completing the full release, with a target release date of  \dptwodate.
The data products released as EDP2 will be incorporated unchanged into DP2 with no additional processing.
Rubin will provide at least 30 days advance notice before each phase goes live.

> This phased delivery reflects a bandwidth constraint in Rubin's hybrid cloud architecture, in which data are stored at the USDF and served to users via the US DAC in Google Cloud.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This phased delivery reflects the development of Rubin's hybrid cloud architecture, in which data are stored at the USDF and served to users via the US DAC in Google Cloud.
```

> Scalability testing revealed that available USDF--Google Cloud network bandwidth is insufficient to serve visit-level images at LSST scale.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Scalability testing shows that available USDF--Google Cloud network bandwidth is currently insufficient to serve visit-level images at LSST scale.
```

Reviewer 3: I made a small suggestion here just to make this sentence fit better with the next one, but I'm not sure this statement is still quite what we want to say. The reader might argue that when it comes to the sufficiency of the bandwidth, and subsequently the latency of the  image transfer and the quality of the user experience, they would prefer to be the judges... Maybe they are willing to wait in a queue for their images, and have been planning for just such a life at LSST scale. Isn't it more that we are asserting that we need a bit more time getting the system as performant as we can before launching?

Engineering work to address this, including installation of new network switches at the USDF, is underway but introduces timing uncertainty.

> Deep coadd images are unaffected: they are hosted directly in Google Cloud\footnote{As will be the case for all future Data Releases.} and can be delivered in EDP2 without reliance on hybrid cloud bandwidth.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Deep coadd images are unaffected: they are hosted directly in Google Cloud\footnote{As will be the case for all future Data Releases.} and can be delivered in EDP2 without reliance on hybrid cloud readiness.
```

> Visit-level images, which must be streamed from the USDF, will follow once sufficient bandwidth is confirmed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Visit-level images, which must be streamed from the USDF, will follow once sufficient performance is confirmed.
```

Coadds are restricted to the footprint established during LSSTCam on-sky commissioning (through \finonskylsstcam); visits from the subsequent early operations period that fall outside this footprint lack sufficient depth for coaddition and are provided as single-epoch images only.
Visit-level exclusions include engineering frames, out-of-focus sequences from Active Optics System (AOS) commissioning, stray-light scans, and visits in the \texttt{excluded\_visits} list (typically images affected by focus errors or anomalous mount or hexapod motion).
See \citeds{RTN-111} Tables~1 and~4 for a full accounting of visit-level exclusions.

\subsubsection{Sky Coverage and depth}

DP2 covers $\sim$15,000~$\mathrm{deg}^{2}$ in at least one filter, of which $\sim$3,000~$\mathrm{deg}^{2}$ were coadded across all six filters.
The coadded footprint encompasses the Wide-Fast-Deep, Small Field Survey, and Deep Drilling Field regions; visits within these areas are included in the coadds if they meet image quality requirements.
Visits outside this footprint are available as single-epoch images only.

> Figure~\ref{fig:dp2_visits_tracts} shows the on-sky distribution of DP2 visits across all filters; the coadded area is further subdivided into the original \emph{survey validation} (SV) footprint ($\sim$3,000~$\mathrm{deg}^{2}$), a consolidated SV footprint ($\sim$750~$\mathrm{deg}^{2}$), and the deepest inner subset ($\sim$300~$\mathrm{deg}^{2}$).

Reviewer 3: Elsewhere the first of these is referred to as "3k" or "wide", while the latter is referred to as the "core". Might be good to settle on three names and use them in both sections. One way to do that would be by adding "wide" and "core" here.

Author: Consolidated terminology

An additional $\sim~15\%$ of otherwise qualifying inputs were excluded on the basis of PSF ellipticity $e$ > 0.2.
Figure~\ref{fig:dp2_psf_maglim} shows the $5\sigma$ PSF magnitude limit across the DP2 coadded footprint for each of the six LSST bands.
\input{figures/dp2_psf_maglim}

An initial tutorial notebook for exploring and visualizing the DP2 visit and tract metadata (e.g., coordinates, filters, dates) is available in the Rubin Science Platform under the ``Tutorials -- DP2'' drop-down menu, and can be used to interactively generate and explore figures such as Figure~\ref{fig:dp2_visits_tracts}.

\subsubsection{DP2 Fields}
The DP2 dataset encompasses the Science Validation wide-area survey,  Deep Drilling Fields (ECDFS, EDFS\_a, EDFS\_b, and ELAISS1, COSMOS), and a number of targeted small-field regions including the Trifid--Lagoon, Prawn, M49, and New Horizons fields that were part of the Rubin First Light campaign (see table \ref{tab:sv_small_field_summary}).
Table \ref{tab:dp1_fields_in_dp2} details the number of visits in DP2 that overlap the DP1 fields with a breakdown by band.
\input{tables/dp1_fields_in_dp2}

\subsubsection{Early DP2 Data Products}
\label{sssec:edp2}

> EDP2 includes \textbf{all} catalog data products derived from the DRP reprocessing of the DP2 dataset, plus the deep coadd images; visit-level images are not available until  DP2 (\S~\ref{sssec:dp2-full}).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
EDP2 includes \textbf{all} catalog data products derived from the DRP reprocessing of the DP2 dataset, plus the deep coadd images; visit-level images and template coadds are not available until DP2 (\S~\ref{sssec:dp2-full}).
```

Deep coadd images will be distributed in a new \texttt{LSST images} FITS-based format, which enables more efficient bulk data access and embeds WCS, PSF models, and photometric calibration metadata in a manner that is independent of details of the LSST science pipelines, supporting long-term archival use.

> New in DP2 are cell-based coadds \citep{dmtn-075, dmtn-294, sitcomtn-137}, a Rubin/LSST image coaddition product in which a survey patch is subdivided into small spatial cells, and each cell is independently coadded using only fully overlapping input exposures to ensure a well-defined, spatially uniform PSF and weighting within the cell.

Reviewer 4: DNTN-294 is deprecated; SITCOMTN-137 is still in draft mode (I can make it not a draft). DMTN-075 is empty. The first proper documentation was going to be the DP2 paper but Jim, I among others can populate one of these notes. We should also cite DMTN-015.

Reviewer 4: SITCOM-162 has DOI and can be the primary reference for both cell-based coadds and `ShearObject`. https://sitcomtn-162.lsst.io/

Author: Thanks @arunkannawadi  -- if you can un-draft DMTN-075 by tomorrow I will include it, otherwise, as you say, I'll just use SITCOMTN-162 as the reference

Author: Included SITCOMTN-162 and DMTN-015

Reviewer 4: Thanks, Leanne. SITCOM-137 (not DMTN-075) is now marked stable.

Author: So the references should be  DMTN-015, SITCOMTN-137, SITCOMTN-162 , correct?

Reviewer 4: Correct.

The driving motivation for cell-based coadds is to improve the accuracy and stability of precision measurements by controlling PSF variation and edge effects that arise in standard coadds.

Solar System processing in DP2 follows the same simplified approach as for DP1 relative to the full Rubin DRP Solar System Processing (SSP) framework.
In its full form, SSP is designed to produce a Rubin-only product, beginning without reliance on the Minor Planet Center (MPC) catalog used in Prompt Processing.

> Instead, it constructs a self-contained “Rubin-only Solar System orbit catalog,” which, although less complete, can be more rigorously debiased than catalogs produced in Prompt mode.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Instead, it constructs a self-contained ``Rubin-only Solar System orbit catalog,'' which, although less complete, can be more rigorously debiased than catalogs produced in Prompt mode.
```

However, for DP2, as in DP1, the available data are insufficient to support robust orbit-based association at this level.
Therefore, Solar System products in DP2 will instead be generated via positional cross-matching of Rubin difference-image detections (\texttt{DiaSources}) with predicted ephemerides of known objects from the MPCORB catalog.

> DP2 will also deliver the first version of the \texttt{ShearObject} catalog, a shape-measurement catalog designed to support weak gravitational lensing measurements \dpdd{},~\citedsp{LSE-163}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

DP2 will also deliver the first version of the \texttt{ShearObject} catalog, a shape-measurement catalog designed to support weak gravitational lensing measurements \dpdd{},~\citedsp{LSE-163}.
```

(I would either make this its own paragraph or move it to be part of some non-SSO paragraph above; it's too easy to miss where it is.)

Table~\ref{tab:data-preview-summary} presents a summary of the data products expected in EDP2.

\subsubsection{DP2 Data Products}
\label{sssec:dp2-full}

> In addition to the data products in EDP2 (Section~\ref{sssec:edp2}), the DP2 release includes all visit-level image data products, completing the DP2 dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the data products in EDP2 (Section~\ref{sssec:edp2}), the DP2 release includes all visit-level image data products, as well as the template coadds constructed from DP2 data, completing the DP2 dataset.
```

> The visit-level image data products comprise the single-visit images contributing to the coadds, as well as approximately $\sim~4{,}000$ additional single-visit images that did not meet the coadd quality criteria (Section~\ref{sssec:dp2-sky}), together with difference images.

Reviewer 2: I think this paragraph might be improved by mentioning the additional sky area involved, unless that's already provided elsewhere in the document.

I would also be careful about the phrasing, to avoid ambiguities on what a "visit image" is, since the physical image data products are per-detector and (I assume) that's not what's being counted here.  One possibility:

```suggestion
The visit-level image data products comprise the single-visit images contributing to the coadds, as well as those from approximately $\sim~4{,}000$ additional visits that did not meet the coadd quality criteria (Section~\ref{sssec:dp2-sky}), together with corresponding difference images.
An additional XXX square degrees of sky are covered by DP2 with the inclusion of these further images.
```

\vspace{0.1cm}
\end{figure}

Wide-area survey regions reach median coadded depths broadly comparable to those reported for the Science Validation surveys (\S\,\ref{ssec:commissioning-lsstcam}).
The Deep Drilling Fields achieve substantially greater depth; ELAISS1 and COSMOS are the most extensively observed, with coverage in all six bands.
Visits are included in the coadds if the visit-level median PSF FWHM is better than 1.7~arcseconds, each detector has a PSF FWHM better than 1.8~arcseconds, and the atmospheric transparency is at least 0.75.
An additional $\sim~15\%$ of otherwise qualifying inputs were excluded on the basis of PSF ellipticity $e$ > 0.2.
Figure~\ref{fig:dp2_psf_maglim} shows the $5\sigma$ PSF magnitude limit across the DP2 coadded footprint for each of the six LSST bands.
\input{figures/dp2_psf_maglim}

An initial tutorial notebook for exploring and visualizing the DP2 visit and tract metadata (e.g., coordinates, filters, dates) is available in the Rubin Science Platform under the ``Tutorials -- DP2'' drop-down menu, and can be used to interactively generate and explore figures such as Figure~\ref{fig:dp2_visits_tracts}.

\subsubsection{DP2 Fields}

> The DP2 dataset encompasses the Science Validation wide-area survey,  Deep Drilling Fields (ECDFS, EDFS\_a, EDFS\_b, and ELAISS1, COSMOS), and a number of targeted small-field regions including the Trifid--Lagoon, Prawn, M49, and New Horizons fields that were part of the Rubin First Light campaign (see table \ref{tab:sv_small_field_summary}).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The DP2 dataset encompasses the Science Validation wide-area survey,  Deep Drilling Fields (ECDFS, EDFS\_a, EDFS\_b, and ELAISS1, COSMOS), and a number of targeted small-field regions including the Trifid--Lagoon, Prawn, M49, and New Horizons fields that were part of the Rubin First Look campaign (see table \ref{tab:sv_small_field_summary}).
```

I think this is First Look!

Author: yes

However, for DP2, as in DP1, the available data are insufficient to support robust orbit-based association at this level.
Therefore, solar system products in DP2 will instead be generated via positional crossmatching of Rubin difference-image detections (\texttt{DiaSources}) with predicted ephemerides of known objects from the MPCORB catalog.

DP2 will also deliver the first version of the \texttt{ShearObject} catalog, a shape-measurement catalog designed to support weak gravitational lensing measurements \dpdd{},~\citeds{LSE-163}.

Table~\ref{tab:data-preview-summary} presents a summary of the data products expected in EDP2.

\subsubsection{DP2 Data Products}
\label{sssec:dp2-full}

In addition to the data products in EDP2 (Section~\ref{sssec:edp2}), the DP2 release includes all visit-level image data products, as well as the template coadds constructed from DP2 data, completing the DP2 dataset.
The visit-level image data products comprise the single-visit images contributing to the coadds, as well as those from approximately $\sim\,4,000$ additional visits that did not meet the coadd quality criteria (Section~\ref{sssec:dp2-sky}), together with corresponding difference images.

> An additional XXX deg$^{\rm 2}$ of sky are covered by DP2 with the inclusion of these further images.

Reviewer 2: We still need this number -- it's the difference between the total sky coverage of EDP2 and DP2.

Author: It's like that as I'm not finished adding it as an automatically calculated parameter
